Title of proposal: Research Software Engineering with Python

Author(s): Damien Irving, Kate Hertweck, Luke Johnston, Joel Ostblom,
Charlotte Wickham, and Greg Wilson

Material supplied: manuscript

## What do you think is good about this manuscript?

A great strength of this manuscript is its choice to center a plausible
project scenario (a Zipfs law software implementation) and use this
example to motivate and demonstrate the core skills needed to run or
contribute to a shared software project.

There are many researchers and professionals who have gathered enough
programming knowledge and related skills to "get by" in their field or
profession -- whether through an introductory course, learning from
colleagues, or poring over Stack Overflow -- but would be hard-pressed
to identify what they need to learn to take the next step -- or even
what that next step might be! This book defines that potential next step
as research software engineering, and shows how to get there. The book
summarizes key practices, organizing principles and communal conventions
used by software developers that apply to even small scale projects,
filling the gaps that are not taught in introductory courses or
well-documented online.

Beyond the manuscript's relevance to a quickly growing group of
researchers and other professionals, the authors have done an excellent
job of paring down topics to key ideas, organizing topics in a logical
way, and providing a motivation for each topic included.

Other noteworthy features of the manuscript include:

-   A commitment to defining terms, resulting in a thorough glossary

-   Supplementary material to the main text in the form of callouts in
    the chapters and several appendices

-   Material that includes the human side of project development

## What reservations do you have about this manuscript?

I have no big-picture reservations about this manuscript. Some chapters
would benefit from additional review or editing to further clarify their
content; many of the exercises still need solutions, but I see these
more as editorial concerns (addressed in the following questions) rather
than significant structure or content reservations.

## Content and structure

In terms of content and structure, do you think the chapters need any
revisions, such as additions or omissions? Please be as specific as
possible.

The opening chapter does an excellent job of setting up the audience and
"syllabus" of the book. Its aim would be strengthened by adding a
section on "How to Use this Book" or expanding the Syllabus (1.3) and/or
Audience (1.2) sections with:

-   Suggestions on how the book could be used. This could be as simple
    as -- "Work through each chapter, following along with the commands
    and changes described in the text. Try at least half of the
    exercises for each chapter" -- to something as complex as an
    appendix with suggestions for a suggested course plan, adapting
    these materials to a lecture, finding a mentor or someone to help
    you (if doing self-study), etc.

-   Emphasizing the presence of exercises and solutions, as well as
    recommendations for how to use them. I agree with the decision to
    include the exercises at the end of each chapter, but I think a note
    recommending that readers not wait until the end to check out some
    of the available exercises would be a good idea.

-   Outlining the standard chapter format: introduction, content,
    exercises; identifying the callout box format as a mechanism to
    supplement the main flow of text.

My only additional comments are about rearranging/splitting specific
material or chapters. None of these are strictly necessary -- I leave it
up to the discretion of the authors as to whether they would improve the
overall manuscript or not.

-   The project organization description (1.4) seemed a bit out of place
    in chapter 1 -- most of that chapter is about course **details**
    (audience, installation, syllabus), but the Project Structure
    section reads like course **content**. If the above suggestion is
    added, this will even more be the case. I see a compelling argument
    for making the current chapter 1 into a numberless prologue or
    introduction and having chapter 1 be a very short chapter with the
    Project Structure content.

-   Chapter 2 (The Basics of the Unix Shell) is very long. Content-wise,
    there isn't a strong reason to split (although the separation
    between 2.8 and 2.9 is one possible place to do so); I would mainly
    recommend splitting this chapter so that there isn't so much content
    before getting to exercises.

-   The section on package documentation (13.6) seems like it could be
    its own chapter, as it delves fairly deeply into the nuts and bolts
    of package documentation tools, which is a departure from the rest
    of the chapter's focus on packaging as a whole. I can understand
    wanting to include the documentation section in the packaging
    chapter so it's not an afterthought, but it makes for a chapter that
    covers two quite distinct topics (conceptually) -- packaging, and
    good documentation practices. Another option besides splitting the
    packaging chapter (ch 13) into two would be to put some of the more
    detailed information about documentation generation into an
    appendix.

## Titles/subtitles

Are the chapter titles/subtitles appropriate? If not, how can they be
modified?

I would recommend standardizing the chapter titles to all follow the
same "formula" of either a) tool/topic, b) intended outcome, or c) a
combination of the two.

For example, chapter five could be:

a)  Git at the Command Line (current title)

b)  Tracking Changes

c)  Tracking Changes with Git at the Command Line

For chapter eight:

a)  Make

b)  Automating Analyses (current title)

c)  Automating Analyses with Make

It may not be possible to fully standardize the titles (I can't think of
a good short punchline for the Unix shell, for example), but I think a
review of the chapter titles to make them align more with the b) and c)
options would be helpful in clarifying the purpose and big picture topic
of each chapter.

## Examples and exercises

Are the chapter examples and exercises appropriate to the subject
matter? If not, how can they be modified?

Yes. One of the book's strengths is the presence of an intriguing and
accessible sample problem that helps motivate the chapter topics and
provides a concrete motivation for going through the chapters and
watching the project grow.

On the whole, the chapter-specific exercises follow directly from the
chapter content and provide good practice opportunities. In certain
cases, an exercise requires executing a complex set of steps (ex: 3.8.3,
4.11.2, or 9.8.6) and could be more valuable if there were hints and/or
scaffolding to help less experienced readers get started.

## Figures and tables

Are the figures and tables visually appealing and useful for the
reader?

The screenshots in chapter 6 (Advanced Git) are great, and extremely
helpful in illustrating what the reader might see in using Github.

All of the figures come at appropriate points in the chapter where a
figure can aid understanding. I found Figures 2.5 and 2.6 hard to
understand.

There is a note in chapter 5 (Git at the Command Line) about including
Figure 5.7. I would include this figure (or one like it) and would also
recommend going back through the chapter and replacing existing diagrams
to match the format of this final figure, so all the figures in that
chapter build up to a final summary like 5.7.

## Length

Do you think the proposed length seems appropriate for the topic and
readership?

Yes. I think the length is appropriate for the topic; it matches other
"programming" books of my experience. I also think it is a good length
to be adapted as an intermediate-level semester-length course, or as a
reference/self-study book for a researcher or other data science
professional role.

## Improvements

Please outline any suggestions you may have to improve the format,
layout, and design of the book.

For the callout boxes, it would be helpful for the horizontal lines to
somehow indicate which side is "inside" the box, and/or for the
preformatted text to be indented in the same way as the rest of the text
inside the box. On pages where the callout box spans a page break or
where there is preformatted text, it can be hard to know which bit is a
callout box and which is the regular chapter text.

## Appeal

Do you think the manuscript will appeal to students? What could be
added to make the book more appealing or timely for students?

As mentioned above, one of the book's strengths is the ongoing sample
project of Zipfs Law. I think the presence of this authentic example --
that the book is not just theory, or toy examples, but demonstrates how
to apply these ideas to a "real" project" -- is appealing to students.
Beyond this, I think the book will have the same appeal for students as
for anyone else who matches the target audience (some
research/programming experience, motivated to work on a new or ongoing
project).

## Approach

Is the author's approach to the subject appropriate for the intended
level of the target audience?

Yes, the book clearly states at the beginning that the audience has
experience with Python programming and working on a project and lays out
the aspirations of potential readers. The book's content addresses each
of these described audience goals and also covers prerequisite skills
(notably the Unix Shell and Git) for achieving these goals.

## Other comments

Please add any further information you think might be helpful to the
author.

Other miscellaneous editorial suggestions:

-   In general, I would read through the first sentence of each chapter
    section and the chapter introduction and make sure that, for most,
    there is a clear "topic sentence" (not necessarily the first
    sentence, but should happen sometimes before the second or third
    paragraph) introducing the topic at hand and why we care about it.
    This formula may not work for every section, but I think it's worth
    checking.

    -   Good examples:

        -   Introduction to chapter 3 (Going Further with the Unix
            Shell): "This chapter extends these ideas to show how we can
            create new tools by saving commands in files and how to use
            a more powerful version of wildcards to extract data from
            files."

            -   Topic: We're going to put commands in files and use
                wildcards

            -   Why: We can create new tools and get data (and do better
                work)

        -   3.2, using variables in a script: "Getting the name of the
            author for only one of the books isn't all that useful. What
            we really want is a way to get the name of the author from
            any of our files." (and then go on to talk about variables)

            -   Topic: Using variables

            -   Why: We want to solve the problem of analyzing all of
                our data.

    -   Examples that could be improved:

        -   2.1, starting to use the shell: I'm looking for something
            like "Our first shell commands will allow us to navigate and
            view the contents of our file system, a foundational skill
            for using the shell to run other commands and use files
            organized in a project."

        -   3.6, introducing shell variables: I'm missing the final "so
            what"---like "knowing about shell variables allows us to
            customize our shell working environment if we use it
            frequently."

    -   If you only review one chapter for these "topic sentences" I
        would recommend chapter 7. The content in that chapter is
        crucially important, and currently can read as somewhat
        unconnected topics around people and project management. A topic
        sentence in each section that links back to the goal of
        empowering people to collaborate together and in a safe and
        productive manner (or connecting a particular section to a
        previous section in the chapter, e.g. 7.6 is really a follow on
        from 7.5) would go a long way towards helping that material
        cohere. That, or adding more details to the introduction,
        outlining the major topics that will be covered in the chapter.

-   I had the most difficulty in following chapter 10 (Error Handling);
    it was the one chapter where I felt like I didn't have a sufficient
    mental model to understand the details of the chapter. I'm not sure
    whether the solution is for me to have a better understanding of
    Python or for the chapter to more explicitly generate a mental model
    for errors and exceptions.

-   For some of the initial appendices (A, B, C), it wasn't clear if the
    text was meant to be used as a sample for your own project (or the
    zipfs sample project) or as a reference for the project that is the
    manuscript itself.

-   An "if there's time/energy" suggestion: in the final chapter,
    revisit the profiles from the first chapter, and what chapters of
    the books were helpful to each person in achieving their goals. E.g.
    "Amira now has her scripts organized in a repository, following the
    project scheme described in this book. She made a documentation page
    for her repository so her co-workers are able to see the work she's
    done..." etc. Not necessary, but would be fun. :)
