## What do you think is good about this manuscript?

The range of topics covered is thorough without being overwhelming.
There is a tendency to attempt to cram every single aspect of software
engineering into a book like this without acknowledging feasible
limits. Yes, it is over 450 pages in it's current draft, but that
seems a reasonable amount given the intended audience.

## What reservations do you have about this manuscript?

There is a sense in which the intended audience may not view
themselves as software engineers (i.e., they are likely researchers in
some other specific scientific discipline). As such, the term
"research software engineering" may miss the mark. That said, there
are plenty of people who do use this term and there are not really any
effective alternatives in common use. So the title is still likely to
reach it's intended audience.

## In terms of content and structure, do you think the chapters need any revisions, such as additions or omissions?

I'm impressed at the depth and breadth of the content, so I see no
need for major revisions beyond normal copy-editing, finishing the
figures, etc.

## Are the chapter titles/subtitles appropriate?

The chapter titles form an appropriate sequence. I might consider
swapping Chapters 12 (Provenance) and 13 (Python Packaging), but the
remaining topics build in a sensible order.

## Are the chapter examples and exercises appropriate to the subject matter?

The examples & exercises are appropriate and notoriously difficult to
create (e.g., constructing exercises to build or assess someone's
understanding of git & version control is very tricky). There seems to
be an appropriate number of exercises at the end of each chapter.

## Are the figures and tables visually appealing and useful for the reader?

Yes.

## Do you think the proposed length seems appropriate for the topic and readership?

For the depth of topics explored, it would be difficult to write a
shorter book. But the topics covered broadly fill in the gaps for a
lot of self-taught programmers and scientists, so, yes, this is about
the correct length. It also fits in appropriately in that there are
very few books that come close to touching on all these topics.

## Please outline any suggestions you may have to improve the format, layout, and design of the book.

I quite like the Zipf's law example in that it uses a fairly
accessible common data analysis context that most people can
understand without having to lean too deeply on any particular subject
matter expertise. That is, someone can be drawn in by this example
without having to be an expert botanist or physicist (or linguist).

## Do you think the manuscript will appeal to students?

The authors describe where to obtain some of the software (e.g.,
Python through Anaconda), but, depending on their own personal
systems, they may have issues installing some of the tools (e.g., git,
bash, etc.) . This is a perennial problem that is not easy to solve.
There are various cloud hosting solutions like Docker that can
mitigate these concerns but those introduce new problems. The
appendices address this problem in part; with luck, this can be
improved with user feedback from legitimate novices who need to
install the tools on their own machines.

## Is the author's approach to the subject appropriate for the intended level of the target audience?

Yes, the guided project illustrates quite nicely how one can structure
research projects to plan for reproducibility.

## Please add any further information you think might be helpful to the author.

None at present; it seems to be fairly comprehensive.
