1. What do you think is good about this manuscript?

a. This is a solid presentation of often overlooked skills for designing not
just useful, but successful software for scientific research. It is all too easy
to develop software that "works" but simply working is a lower bar that most
researchers realize. Software is essential to research---especially in the
natural sciences---but it is a part of the research workflow that can easily
evade scrutiny (few peer reviews include code review). This book presents a
recipe for skills (computational and collaborative) that can help research
software developers deliver reproducible science and build confidence that their
work can be sustained even after their initial contributions.

b. Notes/callouts and glossary are very helpful for the reader. Code
instructions are clear, thorough, and nicely commented.

2. What reservations do you have about this manuscript?

a. Chapters on their own a solid. I think there are times where I felt myself
wanting a bit more "glue" or context. For example, as currently presented,
learning objectives are separated from chapters. I want to know at the beginning
of a chapter: 1) How is this chapter going to make me a better RSE; 2) what are
the specific objectives that are going to get me there. This content is all
there, but why not make it more explicit? For example, in Chapter 4's intro you
tell me that I may need to process thousands of files (good). But the first
sentence comes out of nowhere (reused from some other text?) talking about GUI
IDEs. A little bit of punchy rewriting can answer what I think is the primary
question---How is this going to make be a better RSE.

b. I wrote my answer to question 4 (comment a) before I finished the
introduction to the first chapter. I feel like I am still not 100% convinced
about the title. It works as is without being misleading, but I think revisions
might focus this book a bit, and hopefully the authors will be open to change if
they agree there are different ways to focus things.

3. In terms of content and structure, do you think the chapters need any
revisions, such as additions or omissions? Please be as specific as possible.

a. Looking at the overall order of chapters---would it be beneficial to reorder
in a way that more closely resembles how an RSE might create a project. This
might suggest for example starting with Git to get things organized and under
version control right away. Does chapter 7 on working with teams belong earlier
as well? It felt orienting to see the chapter on automating analyses just after
chapter on teamwork. I am thinking about the behaviors that go along with
software development and placing emphasis on those in a clear context. I'm not
convinced the current order is the best possible one. Perhaps storyboarding the
entire book would help the authors discover opportunities to reorganize. The
approach I suggest is a stylistic preference and might mean making chapters less
monolithic, returning to topics as they are needed.

b. Sec 1.1: Mentions "three" related concepts; why not give sustainability its
own bullet point? I love your definition.

c. Sec 1.1: Grammatical rewrite needed: "Nobody argues that research should be
irreproducible or unsustainable, but "not against it" and actively supporting it
are very different things. Academia doesn't yet know reward people for writing
useful software, so while you may be thanked, the effort you put in may not
translate into job security or decent pay."

d. Sec 1.2: I assume the audience are learner personas---perhaps ones that will
be used throughout the book. This needs explanation because it is jarring to
just have three "audience (members? personas?)" just pop into existence on the
page. Why not explain the use of the personas and how it benefits the reader to
relate to them at this point in the text?

e. Sec 1.2.1: With the exception of your clearly stating Python 3 is needed,
might it be better to specify versions that were used in the creation of the
book examples? I think it is fine to allow learners freedom, especially since at
this point, they would not be novices and probably have their own preferences. I
might still want these specifics (especially if I were teaching this material)
and those could be specified in detail in the GitHub repo accompanying the
book. I don't seem to find Appendix E in my PDF version of the manuscript.

f. Sec 1.3: I might add a sentence or two generalizing the Zipf's law
example. If you want to "sell" the book, I think I would emphasize how looking
for patterns in data is common to most scientific analyses and so you have
chosen a straightforward example that will allow you to teach the concrete
objectives you state. Rather than Syllabus, maybe something more direct---"What
you will learn."

g. Given what I've read up the Chapter 2 on the Unix shell, I am under the
assumption that the audience of this book is already using Python at least an
intermediate level. I'd like to believe that this level of user at least knows
how to manipulate Linux directories. Everything in this chapter felt like
prerequisite, so perhaps it should be an appendix?

h. I think Chapter 3 content was more appropriate for an intermediate Python
user who did not do much with the shell. I might make this 'the' Unix chapter
with a little bit of introductory context as to why the content will be
important for RSEs to be effective in that role.

i. Should Sec 7.6 discuss using GitHub issues templates to create more effective
bug reports.

j. I think Docker is an essential reproducibility tool and feel that a chapter
or section on the subject would be useful.

k. The Finale at this point seems like an afterthought. Perhaps the great
content on working within teams and communities could be reshaped into something
that sends people off thinking about (and hopefully acting on) the helpful
advice presented in these sections?

l. Several exercise answers are missing; noting for thoroughness.

m. Given the current title, I think some additional references to the history of
the "research software engineer" term and the current and growing communities
would be appropriate.

4. Are the chapter titles/subtitles appropriate? If not, how can they be
modified?

a. I don't know if it would make a difference, but I wonder if the title of the
book should be "Engineering Research Software with Python." I make this comment
for three reasons: 1) putting the verb first seems more active; 2) the term RSE
is still growing in notoriety so those who do not know it may not pick up the
connection; 3) I think the author's want everyone to effectively use Python to
develop their software even if they don't consider themselves RSEs; the current
form might make it sound like you already need to be an RSE to use this book.

b. See Q3 comment e about Sec 1.3: Syllabus seems like the wrong title in the
context of a book.

c. Noticing a trend of noun-heavy titles. Could Sec 1.4 have a verb---"Setting
up your project"? The current title might make more sense to me deep inside an
exercise. I am at the beginning and I think active titles are easier for me to
consume (or make the choice that I want to spend time reading).

d. I think Chapter 8 should directly reference Make. I might say there are
several places where I have already learned to automate, but here I am doing
this at a more sophisticated level.

5. Are the chapter examples and exercises appropriate to the subject matter? If
not, how can they be modified?

a. I think the examples and exercises are well-done and appropriate. Because the
audience may come from multiple research disciplines the principle example is
sufficiently generic. Perhaps there is an opportunity to provide some additional
examples that are more discipline specific. Perhaps the learner personas could
be a vehicle to provide additional case studies and examples.

6. Are the figures and tables visually appealing and useful for the reader?

a. Generally, yes---the illustrations are helpful and appropriate

b. There are some formatting issues such as in Sec 4; page 90 where parts of the
docstring/function in the code example overruns the grey background. This
happens in several places but just noting to be thorough.

7. Do you think the proposed length seems appropriate for the topic and
readership?

a. Length is appropriate.

8. Please outline any suggestions you may have to improve the format, layout,
and design of the book.

a. I would suggest an outline that bookends the chapters with learning
objectives rather than having them separated.

9. Do you think the manuscript will appeal to students? What could be added to
make the book more appealing or timely for students?

a. I think these materials can be easily used in the classroom. This would
especially be so if the appendices linked to setup materials as indicated in the
text (I did not review).

10. Is the author's approach to the subject appropriate for the intended level
of the target audience?

a. Yes, although I suggest some revision elsewhere in my answers.
